PRIMER.md, before:

# Smart Dumb Appliance Integration Primer

## Overview
The Smart Dumb Appliance integration is designed to monitor and track the energy usage and operational status of "dumb" appliances (appliances without built-in smart capabilities) by using power consumption data from a power monitoring sensor.

## Core Features

### 1. Power State Detection
- Monitors power consumption to determine if an appliance is running
- Configurable start and stop wattage thresholds
- Debounce period to prevent false triggers
- Real-time power usage tracking

### 2. Energy Tracking
- Cumulative energy consumption in kWh
- Cost tracking based on energy rates
- Per-cycle energy and cost monitoring
- Start and end time tracking for each cycle

### 3. Service Status Monitoring
- Usage count tracking
- Service reminder scheduling
- Maintenance status indicators
- Last and next service date tracking


## Entities

### 1. Current Power Sensor
Attributes:
- Current power reading (W)
- Power thresholds (start/stop watts)
- Running state
- Power sensor configuration
- Last update timestamp

### 2. Binary Sensor (Power State)
Attributes:
- On/Off state
- Current power usage
- Start/End times
- Power sensor configuration
- Last update timestamp

### 3. Cumulative Energy Sensor
Attributes:
- Total energy consumption for the Cycle (kWh)
- Total cost for the Cycle  ($0.00)
- Cycle Start time
- Cycle End time
- Last update timestamp


### 4. Service Status Sensor
Attributes:
- Service status (ok/needs_service/disabled)
- Usage count
- Service reminder settings
- Last/Next service dates
- Current running state
- Current cycle energy and cost
- Last update timestamp

## Configuration Options

### Required Settings
- Device Name
- Power Sensor Entity ID

### Optional Settings
- Cost Sensor Entity ID
- Start Watts Threshold
- Stop Watts Threshold
- Dead Zone
- Debounce Period
- Service Reminder Settings
  - Enabled/Disabled
  - Usage Count Threshold
  - Reminder Message

## Default Values
- Start Watts: 10W
- Stop Watts: 5W
- Dead Zone: 2W
- Debounce: 5 seconds
- Service Reminder Count: 30 uses

## Technical Requirements

### Dependencies
- Home Assistant Core
- Power monitoring sensor entity
- Optional cost sensor entity

### Update Frequency
- Coordinator updates every 1 second
- All entities receive updates through the coordinator

### Error Handling
- Graceful handling of missing sensors
- Error logging for invalid power readings
- State persistence across restarts

## Usage Examples

### Basic Configuration
```yaml
device_name: "Washing Machine"
power_sensor: "sensor.washing_machine_power"
```

### Advanced Configuration
```yaml
device_name: "Dishwasher"
power_sensor: "sensor.dishwasher_power"
cost_sensor: "sensor.electricity_cost"
start_watts: 5
stop_watts: 2
dead_zone: 0.5
debounce: 5
service_reminder:
  enabled: true
  count: 50
  message: "Time to clean the filter"
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues
1. No power sensor found
   - Verify the power sensor entity ID
   - Check if the sensor is available in Home Assistant
   - Ensure the sensor is reporting valid power values

2. False power state detection
   - Adjust start/stop wattage thresholds
   - Increase debounce period
   - Check for power fluctuations

3. Missing updates
   - Verify coordinator is running
   - Check power sensor update frequency
   - Review Home Assistant logs for errors

### Debug Logging
- Detailed logging available for all state changes
- Power threshold crossing notifications
- Cycle summary information
- Service status updates

## Future Enhancements
2. More detailed energy analytics
5. Enhanced visualization options

## Technical Architecture

### Data Flow
1. Power Sensor → Coordinator
   - Coordinator subscribes to power sensor changes
   - Processes power readings to determine appliance state
   - Calculates energy usage and timing information
   - Maintains running state and use count

2. Coordinator → Sensors
   - Coordinator provides data to all sensors
   - Sensors receive updates through async_update()
   - Each sensor type processes data differently:
     - Current Power: Direct power reading
     - Cumulative Energy: Energy calculations
     - Service Status: Use count and maintenance tracking

### Key Classes
1. SmartDumbApplianceCoordinator
   - Manages data updates and state tracking
   - Handles power sensor subscriptions
   - Calculates running state and energy usage
   - Provides data to all sensors

2. SmartDumbApplianceBase
   - Base class for all sensors
   - Handles common initialization and updates
   - Manages icon and color updates
   - Provides shared attributes and methods

3. Sensor Types
   - SmartDumbApplianceCurrentPowerSensor
   - SmartDumbApplianceCumulativeEnergySensor
   - SmartDumbApplianceServiceSensor
   - SmartDumbApplianceBinarySensor

### State Management
1. Coordinator State
   - power_state: Current power reading
   - is_running: Appliance running state
   - start_time: Cycle start timestamp
   - end_time: Cycle end timestamp
   - use_count: Total usage cycles
   - cycle_energy: Current cycle energy
   - cycle_cost: Current cycle cost

2. Sensor State
   - native_value: Primary sensor value
   - extra_state_attributes: Additional data
   - icon: Current display icon
   - entity_picture: Colored icon image

### Debug Logging
The integration provides extensive debug logging at key points:

1. Coordinator Logging
   - Power sensor state changes
   - Running state transitions
   - Energy calculations
   - Update timing information

2. Sensor Logging
   - Update receipt from coordinator
   - State changes
   - Energy calculations
   - Service status changes

3. Binary Sensor Logging
   - State transitions
   - Power readings
   - Timing information

### Common Issues and Solutions

1. No Updates from Coordinator
   - Check power sensor subscription
   - Verify coordinator initialization
   - Review coordinator logs
   - Check power sensor availability

2. Incorrect Running State
   - Verify start/stop thresholds
   - Check power sensor accuracy
   - Review debounce settings
   - Check coordinator logs

3. Missing Energy Calculations
   - Verify timing data
   - Check power readings
   - Review energy calculation logic
   - Check sensor logs

4. Service Status Issues
   - Verify use count tracking
   - Check service reminder settings
   - Review service status logic
   - Check service sensor logs

### Development Guidelines

1. Adding New Features
   - Extend SmartDumbApplianceBase
   - Update coordinator data structure
   - Add appropriate logging
   - Update documentation

2. Modifying Existing Features
   - Review coordinator impact
   - Update all affected sensors
   - Maintain logging consistency
   - Update documentation

3. Debugging
   - Enable debug logging
   - Monitor coordinator updates
   - Check sensor processing
   - Review state transitions

### Testing
1. Manual Testing
   - Power sensor changes
   - Running state transitions
   - Energy calculations
   - Service status updates

2. Logging Verification
   - Coordinator updates
   - Sensor processing
   - State changes
   - Error conditions

Commit message:

Enhance Cumulative Energy Sensor and SmartDumbAppliance classes to track current and total energy consumption and costs. Update logging for better debugging and improve state management in sensor updates. Bump version to 1.4.14-beta.39 in manifest.json.

PRIMER.md, after:

# Smart Dumb Appliance Integration Primer

## Overview
The Smart Dumb Appliance integration is designed to monitor and track the energy usage and operational status of "dumb" appliances (appliances without built-in smart capabilities) by using power consumption data from a power monitoring sensor.

## Core Features

### 1. Power State Detection
- Monitors power consumption to determine if an appliance is running
- Configurable start and stop wattage thresholds
- Debounce period to prevent false triggers
- Real-time power usage tracking

### 2. Energy Tracking
- Cumulative energy consumption in kWh
- Cost tracking based on energy rates
- Per-cycle energy and cost monitoring
- Start and end time tracking for each cycle

### 3. Service Status Monitoring
- Usage count tracking
- Service reminder scheduling
- Maintenance status indicators
- Last and next service date tracking


## Entities

### 1. Current Power Sensor
Attributes:
- Current power reading (W)
- Power thresholds (start/stop watts)
- Running state
- Power sensor configuration
- Last update timestamp

### 2. Binary Sensor (Power State)
Attributes:
- On/Off state
- Current power usage
- Start/End times
- Power sensor configuration
- Last update timestamp

### 3. Cumulative Energy Sensor
Attributes:
- Total energy consumption for the current Cycle (kWh)
- Total energy consumption for the previous Cycle (kWh)
- Total energy consumption for all Cycles (kWh)
- Total cost for the current Cycle  ($0.00)
- Total cost for the previous Cycle  ($0.00)
- Total cost for all Cycles  ($0.00)
- Cycle Start time
- Cycle End time
- Last update timestamps


### 4. Service Status Sensor
Attributes:
- Service status (ok/needs_service/disabled)
- Usage count
- Service reminder settings
- Last/Next service dates
- Current running state
- Current cycle energy and cost
- Last update timestamp

## Configuration Options

### Required Settings
- Device Name
- Power Sensor Entity ID

### Optional Settings
- Cost Sensor Entity ID
- Start Watts Threshold
- Stop Watts Threshold
- Dead Zone
- Debounce Period
- Service Reminder Settings
  - Enabled/Disabled
  - Usage Count Threshold
  - Reminder Message

## Default Values
- Start Watts: 10W
- Stop Watts: 5W
- Dead Zone: 2W
- Debounce: 5 seconds
- Service Reminder Count: 30 uses

## Technical Requirements

### Dependencies
- Home Assistant Core
- Power monitoring sensor entity
- Optional cost sensor entity

### Update Frequency
- Coordinator updates every 1 second
- All entities receive updates through the coordinator

### Error Handling
- Graceful handling of missing sensors
- Error logging for invalid power readings
- State persistence across restarts

## Usage Examples

### Basic Configuration
```yaml
device_name: "Washing Machine"
power_sensor: "sensor.washing_machine_power"
```

### Advanced Configuration
```yaml
device_name: "Dishwasher"
power_sensor: "sensor.dishwasher_power"
cost_sensor: "sensor.electricity_cost"
start_watts: 5
stop_watts: 2
dead_zone: 0.5
debounce: 5
service_reminder:
  enabled: true
  count: 50
  message: "Time to clean the filter"
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues
1. No power sensor found
   - Verify the power sensor entity ID
   - Check if the sensor is available in Home Assistant
   - Ensure the sensor is reporting valid power values

2. False power state detection
   - Adjust start/stop wattage thresholds
   - Increase debounce period
   - Check for power fluctuations

3. Missing updates
   - Verify coordinator is running
   - Check power sensor update frequency
   - Review Home Assistant logs for errors

### Debug Logging
- Detailed logging available for all state changes
- Power threshold crossing notifications
- Cycle summary information
- Service status updates

## Future Enhancements
2. More detailed energy analytics
5. Enhanced visualization options

## Technical Architecture

### Data Flow
1. Power Sensor → Coordinator
   - Coordinator subscribes to power sensor changes
   - Processes power readings to determine appliance state
   - Calculates energy usage and timing information
   - Maintains running state and use count

2. Coordinator → Sensors
   - Coordinator provides data to all sensors
   - Sensors receive updates through async_update()
   - Each sensor type processes data differently:
     - Current Power: Direct power reading
     - Cumulative Energy: Energy calculations
     - Service Status: Use count and maintenance tracking

### Key Classes
1. SmartDumbApplianceCoordinator
   - Manages data updates and state tracking
   - Handles power sensor subscriptions
   - Calculates running state and energy usage
   - Provides data to all sensors

2. SmartDumbApplianceBase
   - Base class for all sensors
   - Handles common initialization and updates
   - Manages icon and color updates
   - Provides shared attributes and methods

3. Sensor Types
   - SmartDumbApplianceCurrentPowerSensor
   - SmartDumbApplianceCumulativeEnergySensor
   - SmartDumbApplianceServiceSensor
   - SmartDumbApplianceBinarySensor

### State Management
1. Coordinator State
   - power_state: Current power reading
   - is_running: Appliance running state
   - start_time: Cycle start timestamp
   - end_time: Cycle end timestamp
   - use_count: Total usage cycles
   - cycle_energy: Current cycle energy
   - cycle_cost: Current cycle cost

2. Sensor State
   - native_value: Primary sensor value
   - extra_state_attributes: Additional data
   - icon: Current display icon
   - entity_picture: Colored icon image

### Debug Logging
The integration provides extensive debug logging at key points:

1. Coordinator Logging
   - Power sensor state changes
   - Running state transitions
   - Energy calculations
   - Update timing information

2. Sensor Logging
   - Update receipt from coordinator
   - State changes
   - Energy calculations
   - Service status changes

3. Binary Sensor Logging
   - State transitions
   - Power readings
   - Timing information

### Common Issues and Solutions

1. No Updates from Coordinator
   - Check power sensor subscription
   - Verify coordinator initialization
   - Review coordinator logs
   - Check power sensor availability

2. Incorrect Running State
   - Verify start/stop thresholds
   - Check power sensor accuracy
   - Review debounce settings
   - Check coordinator logs

3. Missing Energy Calculations
   - Verify timing data
   - Check power readings
   - Review energy calculation logic
   - Check sensor logs

4. Service Status Issues
   - Verify use count tracking
   - Check service reminder settings
   - Review service status logic
   - Check service sensor logs

### Development Guidelines

1. Adding New Features
   - Extend SmartDumbApplianceBase
   - Update coordinator data structure
   - Add appropriate logging
   - Update documentation

2. Modifying Existing Features
   - Review coordinator impact
   - Update all affected sensors
   - Maintain logging consistency
   - Update documentation

3. Debugging
   - Enable debug logging
   - Monitor coordinator updates
   - Check sensor processing
   - Review state transitions

### Testing
1. Manual Testing
   - Power sensor changes
   - Running state transitions
   - Energy calculations
   - Service status updates

2. Logging Verification
   - Coordinator updates
   - Sensor processing
   - State changes
   - Error conditions
